(lighter clicking)
(flame sizzles)
(spitting)
(gun clicks)
(intense music playing)
Ronald Silversmith:
In Navajo law enforcement,
in order to survive,
you have to live
the Navajo way of life.
We always have this calling
upon our two twin warriors.
How the story goes is,
you know,
they fought the Yeitso,
the giant monsters
that were out here
that were plaguing Navajoland
so we can live and prosper.
We can live in peace.
But when the last monster
was defeated,
when he was sent back up
into the sky,
he was saying,
"I'm gonna come back...
(thunder rumbling)
Ronald:
"...bringing back the Naayéé',
all the evil
upon our homelands."
(siren wailing)
Ronald:
He was saying,
"I'm gonna take your culture.
I'm gonna take your songs.
"I'm gonna take
your ceremonies.
"You're gonna go
through hunger.
through poverty.
All that is gonna come back."
And some elders say
it's here now.
Training officer 1:
Fix it up, recruit.
Fix it up, class 57.
Ronald:
So we teach
our young Navajo recruits
at the academy...
Gary Franklin:
Shooters, stand by.
Ronald:
...to call back upon
the twin warriors...
Sgt. Rob Williams:
Take your time.
Ronald: ...to fight
the monsters of today.
(gunshots)
Ronald:
That warrior spirit,
it gives you the confidence
to protect your people,
but it also gives you
the ability,
if you need to...
(gun clicks)
Ronald:
...to protect your life,
'cause anything
can happen out there.
Dispatch (over radio):
Requesting more units 6712-200.
Shawvan Levi:
Drop the gun!
(radio static hisses)
Shawvan:
Put it down!
All you gotta do
is just put it down.
(indistinct shouting)
Shawvan:
Don't you move!
Don't you reach.
Stay where--
(gunshot)
(somber instrumental
music playing)
♪♪
(wind gusting)
(man speaking Navajo)
(continues in Navajo)
(in English)
The voice of the Navajo Nation.
(Native American chanting
playing over radio)
Dan Arnold: Throughout the week,
we do native music
and Friday morning we run
a program that's called
Oldies But Goodies,
country classic.
Eddy Raven,
the late Gary Stewart,
and George Strait music.
Matter of fact,
George Strait was here
on the Navajo Nation
back in 1984
and from that day on,
a lot of our Diné people
fell in love
with George Strait music.
Classic country
never goes out of style.
("Ocean Front Property"
by George Strait playing)
♪ If you leave me ♪
♪♪ I won't miss you ♪
♪ And I won't ever
take you back ♪
♪ Girl, your memory ♪
♪ Won't ever haunt me ♪
♪♪ 'Cause I don't love you,
and now, if you'll buy that ♪
♪ I got some
ocean front property ♪
♪ In Arizona ♪
Buu Nygren: What makes
Navajo Nation special is family.
We're born with our clans.
Whatever the four clans
that we have
has us tied
to our communities
and our nation
through thick and thin.
No matter where you go,
you have that family tree
that really brings you
back home.
(crowd cheering)
Announcer (over loudspeakers):
Come on, (indistinct), come on.
Yeah!
(crowd cheering)
(kids laughing)
Shandiin Yazzie:
We're taught at a young age
everybody is your relative
and to have kinship and k'é.
K'é is that universal unity
between Diné people.
It's like me going up
to a random stranger
and I'm willing
to help them out
because k'é means
that you have
a responsibility
to one another.
(siren chirps)
Sgt. Lucy Dan:
We're all one tribe.
We do what we need to
to help each other...
Child:
Look, I got a glasses.
Sgt. Dan:
...but with all the crimes
that happen here
on the reservation,
people feel they don't have
any place to turn to for help.
Eugenia Charles-Newton: This is
the Law and Order committee
for the 24th Navajo Nation
Council irregular meeting,
ready to provide a report
regarding police
and public safety.
Speaker:
A young man shot into vehicles,
occupied residences,
and the police, uh, didn't come
for several days.
(in English)
Navajo PD was called.
"We can't make it out."
That's crazy.
Speaker 2: And all we heard was
"Stop being mad at us."
That's the attitude
that we receive out here.
How many more years are we
gonna be in this situation?
Eugenia: The law and
order committee receives calls
about the response time.
You know, officers,
takes them forever to respond.
We're out of control...
(speaking Navajo)
Eugenia: But the fact is
we don't have enough officers
to do the job.
(siren wailing)
An increase in criminal activity
has come upon us.
Violent crimes,
increase in bootlegging,
drugs, gang activity,
drive-by shootings,
missing persons.
Phillip Francisco:
The Navajo Nation is
a very large land base.
We're the largest tribe
in the United States.
We have 27,000 square miles
of territory that we have
to patrol.
You know,
it's the size of West Virginia.
Daryl Noon:
We recently had an assessment
that found in order to offer
the basic police services
we would need
at least 500 officers.
Right now, we have 180.
But when you start trimming
those numbers down
to actual
on-the-ground patrol officers
responding to calls,
we're looking more
down to 130.
(dog barking)
I'm sending resources
to assist you, okay?
Sgt. Williams: I don't think the
public generally understands,
well, we're also working
a stabbing over here,
or we have a medical
emergency over there,
so it's hard
and sometimes heartbreaking
to go to these calls
and tell people,
"I'm sorry I couldn't
get here sooner."
Sgt. Williams: Okay,
you just got to call us back.
And that's just,
that's how it is.
Sgt. Dan: We have to travel
huge distances,
and because of
the low numbers of officers,
most of us are by ourselves.
Officer:
Navajo Police.
So sometimes we end up
way out there
and our backup is probably
45 minutes,
even an hour, sometimes.
35, Chinle, location?
Sgt. Williams:
To make things worse,
we don't always have
radio communications.
(static crackling)
Location?
Sgt. Williams: Our lives are
at stake, quite frankly.
News Anchor:
There have been five
Navajo Nation police officers
shot in the line of duty
in the past three years.
Daryl: We were already
shorthanded all these years,
but then you add on to that,
you know, COVID hit.
News Anchor 2:
Well, The Navajo Nation has
the highest infection rate
in the United States.
Daryl: We were not sufficiently
staffed to handle that.
Phillip:
As time goes on,
it's really getting
more difficult
to find people
that want to do this job.
Officer:
Column left. Hard.
Speaker:
This is a very special day
for the Navajo Police Academy
Class 56.
You have a big task ahead of you
going from recruits
to police officers.
I challenge every class
for everybody to pass,
but, you know, they haven't
fulfilled that yet,
but this is what it is.
Sgt. Williams: From my point
of view, I think it's dire.
The number of officers
we graduate per class
since I've been here
the most have been 19.
This last class was 12.
Lt. Donnie Kee:
It's been a rough couple years
for the Navajo Nation,
and I think the general vibe is
you know,
we're ready to move forward.
(officer speaking Navajo)
Lt. Kee:
But the obstacles
and the challenges
of Navajo Nation
are uniquely different than
anywhere else in the country.
It's generational.
Speaker (singing):
♪ For the land of the free ♪
Daryl: You know,
there's a lot of history
here on the Navajo Nation,
and not all of it is, is good.
Speaker (sings):
♪ And the home ♪
♪ Of the ♪
♪ Brave ♪
Sgt. Williams:
Good morning, class 57.
Class:
Sir, good morning, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
That was weak. Try again.
Good morning, class 57.
Class:
Sir, good morning, sir!
Sgt. Williams:
I am one of your class sergeants
here at the Navajo Police
Training Academy.
This will be your first day
of orientation.
You'll be given
every reasonable opportunity
to achieve here.
Carmine, fix this one
in the back.
In a few moments,
we will go into the classroom
where you'll be spending upwards
of the next 28 weeks
obtaining your education
in basic law enforcement.
Training officer:
Class, fall out.
Sgt. Williams: I can see we have
a lot of work to do.
Training officer:
Move with purpose.
Sgt. Williams: Any observations,
concerns, or suggestions?
(laughter)
-How?
-Yeah, we're all like,
"Are we looking
at the same class?"
Sgt. Williams:
I, I hope so
'cause a bunch
of them are coming
to your district, Koho.
(laughter)
Sgt. Williams:
I was working in Page PD
pushing a radio car back then,
and I could hear
the Navajo PD units
on the other side
of the imaginary line.
They were just--
They sounded like
they were having
a good time out there.
(laughter)
Sgt. Williams: They would get
into some precarious situations
so they were tight.
They had an ingrained sense
of community,
and I have yet
to meet an officer
who doesn't have that
in their heart
here at Navajo PD.
It's like...
I don't know,
it's just kind of heartwarming,
for lack of a better word.
Class:
Class 57 requesting permission
to enter the classroom,
instructor!
Lt. Kee:
It is unique
with Navajo officers
policing Navajo people.
Th-there's no, uh,
there's no color involved.
People don't see color.
You know,
I mean most of the officers
police an area
in which they live.
This establishes
some level of rapport
as it relates to Navajo clanship
or k'é, uh, family.
Recruit:
Attention on deck!
Lt. Kee:
Have a seat.
Class:
Sir, thank you, sir.
I'm Lieutenant Donnie Kee.
I'm the training commander here
at Navajo Police
Training Academy.
The attrition rate
is roughly 50%,
meaning that with 28 people
starting this academy,
what's the expectation
that we're gonna graduate
how many?
Class:
Sir, 14, sir.
Lt. Kee:
Fourteen.
And 14 is not enough
to provide any kind
of decent relief
to the bodies that are working
the streets right now.
And so my job is to change
that attrition rate
to 20%.
So there's a large amount
of discipline
that you will have
to exercise here.
I've learned over
the course of my career
that nothing worthwhile
is accomplished in comfort.
From the day you were born
to the day you die,
that is gonna hold true.
You need to get comfortable
being uncomfortable.
Does everybody understand that?
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
Lt. Kee: I spent 20 years
in law enforcement
in the state of New Mexico
and had retired.
I was retired for a whopping
three and a half weeks,
um, and in that three weeks,
I fished quite a bit
and I almost struggled
for, for a little bit
and really almost lost
a sense of purpose.
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
Everybody's got a job, smile.
It's a good day.
Everybody's getting paid
to work out.
How awesome is that?
High skips. High skips.
I grew up on the reservation
and I-I went away,
and I missed hearing
the Navajo language spoken.
I missed hearing people laugh,
just Navajo people laugh,
and the way that people
took care of each other.
(laughing)
And so I'm really happy
to be able to come back here
because I'm able to contribute,
uh, with what, what I can.
And that's,
that's everything to me.
You represent everyone
that has ever worn
that uniform
by your presence here.
I know that our goal
is 500 officers
in the next five years.
Recruit:
Detail. Halt.
Lt. Kee:
If we could hit that mark,
I think that that would give
Navajo people in general
some, some pride
in, in the fact
that we're,
we're moving forward.
Would be amazing to see
that many officers here.
Shawvan:
Class,
Recruit Largo,
Recruit Garcia,
and Recruit Cattleman
for a color detail.
-Lt. Kee: He's a good kid.
-He is.
Lt. Kee:
I hope he makes it this time.
Just get him to calm down
on the range.
Firearms instructor:
Alright, you ready?
Slow motion.
Take your time.
Go ahead and draw.
Get a feel of the motion.
Okay. Alright.
So do you feel anything
that you can improve
just off your draw?
Um...
Firearms instructor:
You can holster up.
Shawvan:
No, not that I know.
Firearms instructor:
Okay, let's try it again.
Nice and slow.
Ready? Draw.
Shawvan: When I first attended
the academy
with the last class,
class 56,
I just did the best
I could, studied.
The firearms came--
Firearms instructor:
Relax. (exhales forcefully)
Breathe, relax.
-(gunshot)
-There you go.
Shawvan:
The third qualification,
my last chance,
I didn't make it.
Like you guys kept telling us,
don't look at your target
after shooting.
Yeah. Yeah.
Shawvan:
That's what I kept doing,
and the last three shots
I pulled the trigger
and it jerked...
-Yeah. Yeah.
-...and it went off,
and I missed it.
All I could think about
was, "Shoot."
Like, "What's my family
going to think?
"What is my girlfriend
"How am I going to tell them
that I failed?
that, uh, I-I can't go on
into police academy?"
Stephanie Sanisya:
You guys want to put the tinsel
on the tree with us?
Boy: What do we do
with these things?
(giggles)
Just grab like that.
-Not-- uh, not that much.
-Shawvan: Oh.
Stephanie: You only need, like,
a couple of strands.
Shawvan:
Oh.
Stephanie:
That's very pretty.
He called me, and he was sad.
I could hear it.
Once he walked in the door,
you know,
we just hugged,
and I told him
I was still proud of him.
Um... sorry.
(chuckles)
I know how he felt
in that moment.
He worked so hard
to reach that point.
He didn't want to get
emotional at the range,
but he ended up crying
at home.
Firearms instructor:
So pay attention to how
I get back on target.
My eyes don't move
from that site.
It stays on target, right?
I'm focused
on that deadly force.
(gunshots)
Shawvan:
I'm coming back into class 57
with more confidence
that I can, I can do it
and that I will pass.
But in the back of my mind,
I'm just like,
"What if-if-if I,
I don't make it this time?"
"Cause I know everything
isn't always gonna be
the way you want it to be.
That last shot, you jerked it
to the right, okay?
Sgt. Dan:
Homework assignments.
When you guys are given
a date, a due date,
get it done.
Sgt. Williams: Big part of
this job is time management,
so find the time,
and this will probably be
one of the last times
I'm going to talk to you
in this manner, right?
'Cause if-- you're gonna
get Sergeant Williams out,
and you don't want that.
Wyndean Largo:
Sir, yes, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
So what happened
to you, Largo?
Sgt. Williams: How much
livestock are we talking about?
Yellowstone Ranch livestock?
Largo:
Four horses, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
Four-- Okay.
Well, horses aren't easy.
But still, you honestly look
at me in the eye
and tell me that you
couldn't find 30 minutes
in your entire weekend.
Largo:
I could have done it, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
So find the time
because like I said,
this is the first step
out the door,
and there's no reason
to lose you guys
to something like this.
Alright? Do you have
any questions about it?
Largo:
Sir, no, sir.
Sgt. Williams:
My first class that I was here,
all my peers had been
through a few classes,
and I was very green.
I'm like, "Oh, they're all
gonna make it.
"Look at them.
They're all excited.
"They're all motivated.
They're all determined."
And then they laugh at me.
Some people aren't
prepared mentally,
emotionally to deal with it
in the long run,
so they-they leave.
And we've already seen it here
at the start of class 57
with a couple folks.
Day one is usually the day
that we have people quit.
You know, one, two, but this
is only orientation week,
and then we've got four
that left.
I don't know. It's not--
We haven't even gotten
to the hard part yet, so...
Sgt. Williams:
I think they mindfuck
themselves, honestly.
These people,
they have tons of potential
and we can see it in them,
but it just depends on why
you're here to begin with.
Instructor:
Come on, Pettigrew.
-Speaker: Go! Go!
-(whistle blows)
Cheyenne Pettigrew:
I was taking classes
at community college.
Sgt. Dan:
You got it. Come on.
Cheyenne:
And also working
as a Navajo Nation
police dispatcher,
(whistle blows)
So when I'm sitting there
in dispatch
and there's no backup
or everyone's on call
and there's another call
for help,
there's no one to send
and it's really frustrating.
(chuckles)
Sgt. Dan:
There you go.
Sgt. Williams:
By and large,
they're pretty young.
(laughter)
Antwan Gray:
I wanted to play college ball.
I couldn't go with that process
because my wife was pregnant.
I got her pregnant
my senior year.
Sgt. Dan:
Come on, Gray.
Antwan: This was the job
I had to wait for
until I was 21,
and I'm willing to put
my life at risk,
even though I have a family,
to go help people.
Um...
I'm pretty scared though.
(nervous laughter)
Sgt. Williams: How are you doing
this morning, Julius?
We occasionally have...
You know,
we always tease them, aw,
it's the grandma or the grandpa
who comes through,
and that's usually just somebody
in their thirties maybe.
(indistinct shouting)
Julius Billy:
Prior to this,
I was a rail operator.
The company was, um, shut down
due to the current pandemic.
Sgt. Dan:
Billy, lock your elbows out.
Julius:
You know, I got two kids
so you have
to find that job.
What else is out there for me
that I can, I can do?
Sgt. Dan:
Ready!
Julius:
I'm on the older side here.
It's a challenge
running against
these younger
20-year-olds, you know?
Lt. Kee:
Fight!
-(fighters grunting)
-(punches thudding)
Recruit:
Let's go, Billy.
Julius:
Uh, it's gonna be
a long, rough road ahead.
That's all I can say.
It's gonna be tough.
Recruit:
Let's go, Billy.
Julius:
I already see that.
Sgt. Williams: Alright,
it's done, it's done,
it's done, it's done.
Recruit:
One, two, three.
Class:
Seven.
Sgt. Williams:
Some people really want
to be here,
and they really want to serve.
Class:
Eight.
Sgt. Williams:
Some of you need
to get your hair cut,
and now because
of dinks like that,
all of you will shave
your head
like Too Tall here.
Take a look.
I know you can see him.
William Sloan:
They call me Too Tall.
(laughs)
The beginning of this year,
I was actually working
in Portland,
and that was pretty much
no choice for me.
You know, I had to provide
for my family
so that's why I had to leave.
And then as soon as I got work
closer to home,
I took the opportunity,
and it all led
to me coming here.
Lt. Kee:
If you haven't figured it out,
the shortest distance
between two points is what?
Straight line.
Not like this.
We're not building houses
on the Navajo Nation.
-(class laughs)
-Lt. Kee: Right? Alright.
William: I've always actually
wanted to be a police officer
since I was little.
Lt. Kee:
Come on, Sloan.
William: Growing up, we had
some pretty crazy neighbors
around the neighborhood.
Lot of trouble
that was going on.
We didn't have a man
in the house to stand up
to several people
that would be,
like, raising their voices
or being physical,
and the cops would show up.
It was kind of inspirational
how I would see them,
like, just, like, approach
the situation, you know?
They didn't do anything
physical or anything.
They just walked over there
well-mannered
and handled the situation.
You see a lot of people
on the reservation
that need help too.
Recruit:
Good job, Allen.
Speaker:
Let's go hustle, hustle!
William: So that's why
I'd love to be a cop.
Speaker 2:
There you go!
Speaker 3: It's all about speed
right here, Clitso.
William: I have
my cousin brother here.
-Deshane Begay.
-Sgt. Dan: Go.
(grunts)
William:
My mom and his father,
they're brothers and sisters
but the first two clans
of ours are the same.
Which is Naakai Dine'é.
Yeah, that's what
makes us brothers.
Sgt. Dan:
Side.
William: I told him about
the police academy
and he signed up too.
He was kind of iffy
about coming but, you know,
I was like, "Hey, man,
if I go and I finish,
you got to go
and finish with me too,"
and he took that
big step with me.
(sheep bleating)
(kid babbles)
(water sloshing)
Water.
Kid:
Mm, wa-yer.
William: I'm a family person.
I have a wife and son.
(sheep bleating)
Before I joined the academy,
I had a lot going on, you know.
I just lost my mom last year
due to COVID, so...
And a lot of people
that I was close to,
like my grandparents,
they passed away,
and a lot of my knowledge
that I carry on today
was carried off
from my grandparents.
Did grandma tell you what we're
gonna do with the storage?
No? She told, she told me
to take it down.
-Deshane: Really?
-Yeah.
She wants you
to save me this top,
the roof here
and save it for these guys.
Deshane: Remember there's like
two black ones
and then, like,
two white ones
and they both end up dying,
all four of them.
William: See, that's why we need
to double this thing
'cause these guys are
gonna start doubling quick.
Deshane:
Oh, yeah.
William: They taught me
a lot of things about, like,
how to take care
of your family,
how to take care of yourself.
You just got to watch
over everyone.
The same way
you take care of yourself
is how you should watch
over your people.
My father's side,
they're traditional.
They still participate
in the traditional ways
of ceremonies and stuff,
like how we wake up
in the morning.
You know, some people
are traditional,
they pray to the sun
as it comes up, so...
And I'm one of those people.
You know, when the sun's
come up, I'm,
I'm praying to the sun
'cause, you know,
that's kind of
like, good blessings
to yourself.
But I also respect
the Christianity side
just because my mom's side,
we're Christians.
Recruit:
What are we giving out next?
William: My mom always knew
that I wanted to be a cop too.
Like, I've always used to talk
to her about it,
but I used to tell her, like,
I'm not, like,
mentally there for it.
So now that I feel like
I'm, like,
mentally there, like,
I feel like I can do this.
Training officer:
Fix yourself!
Speaker:
Help each other out.
Thank you, man.
William: It means
a lot to me, you know,
being a cop that protects
his own community.
Thank you, sir.
You're part
of the reservation,
and, you know, like, people
that leave off
the reservation,
they start losing
their culture too.
And if you live
on the reservation,
you know,
your culture's still alive.
You see it everywhere.
You see it around you.
(Class speaking Navajo)
Recruit:
Good, ready, begin.
(class speaking Navajo)
Sgt. Dan: Day one is only gonna
be hard for you
if you make it hard.
Don't even think of it
as being hard.
Just-just get it done.
That's all you got to do.
Sgt. Williams: Don't do anything
stupid this weekend.
Don't go out and get drunk,
do anything dumb.
Your lifestyles are changing
as you enter
into this profession.
You won't be at the end
of this training,
nor do you get to be
the same person you were
when you enter this profession.
It's just not possible.
So have those high standards
so you can hold
your head up high
when you've earned that shield
and you start
your field training program.
Steady yourselves.
It's gonna be a busy day,
it's gonna be chaotic.
If you're determined,
you'll get through it
if you don't quit on yourself.
We're not gonna quit
on you ever.
Shawvan:
Class, attention!
-(feet stomping)
-Class: Never back down!
Never quit!
Always commit!
Class 57.
Shawvan:
Fall out.
Sgt. Williams:
Five, four, three, two, one.
And that's all she wrote
for this week.
(spray hissing)
(woman humming)
Nora Allen: Clitso, you stink
but not that bad, okay?
(laughter)
Nora:
I'm kidding.
I brought my other flashlights,
but they're already dead.
Roberta Clitso: How long
did you have it on?
Well, I used them
the other night
kind of like on and off
just 'cause I was, like,
packing too, so...
It's just been go, go, go.
I mean,
I couldn't even do, like,
one situp when I got here.
Did you work out, like,
before you got here or not?
Roberta:
I worked out here and there,
but I had to work till,
like, up to my last day.
I slept at the house,
I packed up my stuff
and I came out here.
I think it's just having to come
to terms that this is...
this is our life.
It's just gonna be go, go, go.
(animal howling)
Recruit 1:
Does anybody need a clip-on tie?
Recruit 2:
Here.
Thanks, man.
Shawvan: Let's go!
We only have 10 minutes!
Cheyenne:
Allen, I have a extra one.
Recruit:
Hey, Pettigrew. Thank you.
Cheyenne:
Yay!
Shawvan: Did you guys bring
your PT gear and everything?
Class:
Yes, sir. Yes, sir.
Recruit: Are we marching down
there or are we just (inaudible)
Shawvan: No, we're just
running down there.
Recruit:
Yes, sir.
Shawvan:
Let's head on out.
(indistinct shouting)
Present arms!
Dress right, dress.
Remember, we sound off
on the class motto, okay?
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
Shawvan: Since I had
13 weeks of experience
with the academy before,
I do feel like I take on
a bigger role coming into this
because I do expect myself
to not only graduate
but to also be that leader.
Platoon, attention!
They do kind of ask me like,
"Hey, how was it?
How is this?"
And seeing on their face
that they're nervous,
that they're scared but they
don't want to admit it,
I open up to them and tell them,
"Hey, it's, it's okay."
It's all about that support.
Today's gonna be the day
where they want
to see us all work together.
Somebody's struggling,
help them out.
Somebody's falling behind,
push them, motivate each other
because that's exactly
the way it's gonna be
when we get out
on the road.
Brothers and sisters,
that's what we are.
This academy is gonna
be like that.
The whole 28 weeks
is when we have each other.
As you guys know,
we're dwindling down in size
as police officers
around the Navajo Nation.
So at the end of the day,
I want to see everybody
that's here now,
still here tomorrow.
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
(laughter)
Sgt. Williams: You're about
to live the rookie dream.
Just walk up to him
and be like...
(whispering)
"You're gonna die."
(laughter)
Training officer:
Biggest mistake of your life.
Help me.
Sgt. Williams:
You're fucked up.
(laughter)
Sgt. Williams:
Alright.
Shannon was kind enough
to bring some Halls.
Take some, remember,
push from your diaphragm,
don't use your throat.
Training officer:
Let's go!
(indistinct shouting)
(siren wailing)
Sgt. Williams:
Fall in over here!
Fucking idiot.
What are you doing?
Inside!
Split it up!
You were advised
to have your gear out!
Go get it!
(overlapping shouting)
Sgt. Williams:
Work together!
Go fuck yourself.
For fuck's sake,
double arm intervals!
Are you even listening?
Sgt. Dan:
Who told you guys what to do?
Move!
Sgt. Williams:
Dump all your stuff out.
Sgt. Dan:
Grab your backpack.
(indistinct shouting)
Sgt. Dan:
Are you fucking kidding me?!
(indistinct shouting)
Give me your duty belt, now!
Sgt. Dan:
Give me your belt, now!
Sgt. Williams:
Your duty belt!
Nobody wants
your personal belt.
Sgt. Dan:
Where's your belt?
Shawvan: Ma'am, I didn't think
we needed it
for the first day, ma'am.
Sgt. Dan:
You would leave your home
without your belt,
without your gun, without
any equipment to help you?
Shawvan: Ma'am,
there's no excuses, ma'am.
Sgt. Dan:
There's definitely no excuses.
Training officer: All your
classmates have a towel!
Where's your towel at?
Answer me, recruit,
answer me!
Nora: Sir, should be
at home, sir.
Training officer:
Why is your shit not put away?!
Put it away!
Clean this place up!
Sgt. Dan: Pick up your stuff!
Pick up your stuff!
Training officer:
If it ain't yours, just grab it.
Sort it out later. Let's go!
Sgt. Williams:
Not fast enough!
Too much time!
Dump them out.
Dump 'em!
Dump your bags!
Sgt. Dan: So day one,
working on the mindset.
I mean, being here at
the academy is kind of like...
There's like mind games.
Sgt. Williams:
Dump the bag!
You took too long!
Sgt. Dan:
They're gonna be in trouble
no matter what they do.
Even if they do it right.
Sgt. Williams:
Were you told you could put
anything in the barracks?
Recruit: I didn't put it
in the barracks, sir.
Sgt. Williams: I don't want
to hear your excuses!
As a police officer,
you have to be able
to roll with the punches.
That's a huge
part of the job.
Nothing ever goes the way
you think it's going to go.
Now give me this!
Let me help you again!
We're applying pressure,
we're applying stress.
Let's go!
Sgt. Williams:
Because we have to develop
those neural pathways.
Here's what it's like
to have somebody in your face.
(training officer screaming)
They can't experience that
for the first time in the field.
We teach what we teach
for a reason.
Training officer:
I need somebody to come
and save my ass
when I get into shit.
I need someone
who can listen,
pay attention,
and know when I need help!
If you guys
can't follow directions,
you shouldn't be here!
Get in line! Get in line!
Get in sync!
Training officer:
Get your feet up, let's go!
Sgt. Dan:
Are you freaking tired already?
We've barely started!
(wind whistling)
(flies buzzing)
(clears throat)
Shawvan:
How's everyone feeling?
(indistinct chatter)
-Cheyenne: My hip hurts.
-Recruit: Good, sir.
Shawvan: We just got
to take care of ourselves.
But keep working hard.
(door opens)
Class, attention!
Sgt. Dan:
You guys tired?
Class:
Ma'am, no, ma'am.
Sgt. Dan: We're gonna do
a little team building,
working together
on how to get this task done
that we've given you.
You will have
to help each other.
My maternal grandpa was
a medicine man,
and he took a lot of time
helping people.
My mom, my father,
they did the same thing.
So I think it's more
of a calling for me,
like I was led into it.
I'm guided by spirits
to come into this field.
Class:
Ma'am, yes, ma'am.
Sgt. Dan: See all my family
right here in brown?
They're my family.
Just like you guys will be
and will have to be
by the time we are done.
There's that connection.
There's a bond,
and I tend to get emotional
because it's, it's just
deep inside me, I guess.
Squad one, run in there.
Training officer:
Grab your water.
Training officer: (indistinct)
get him up here!
Training officer 2:
Get him up there.
Sgt. Williams:
So it took them six minutes
-to get up that side...
-Yeah.
-...and it took the last class
six minutes
to complete
the whole thing, right?
Sgt. Dan:
Yeah.
Sgt. Williams:
For fuck sake.
It's our mission
to prepare a civilian
to work in the field.
So folks come in real soft.
Training officer:
Get them up there!
Sgt. Williams:
Some folks who are just sedate,
they're not athletic.
Training officer:
That got nowhere quick, huh?
(sighs) Some, I'd say
horribly out of shape.
We get some chunky folks
coming through here.
(Deshane panting)
Sgt. Williams: The structured
physical training,
sometimes that's a shock
for you,
and it comes day after day,
every day.
(Deshane groans)
Sgt. Williams:
It's not easy
so if you're
a person looking
for easy work,
this isn't where you want to be.
Lt. Kee:
Don't feel sorry for yourself.
Quit thinking about
how your body hurts.
how tired you are.
It can't go on forever, can it?
Class:
Sir, no, sir.
How do we eat
a shit sandwich?
Class:
Sir, one bite at a time, sir.
One bite at a time.
Your success at the academy
will be directly related
to the amount of work
you put in
with the effort
in which you apply.
If you don't have
a sense of purpose,
you will not be here long.
Sgt. Williams: You know,
you can't tell a person's heart
by looking on the outside.
Sgt. Dan: You got it.
Don't give up, Pettigrew.
Sgt. Williams: And if you get
some person in here like,
"Oh, pff, they're gonna--
You know,
they're not gonna make it,"
but it turns out
they've got a lot of heart.
Sgt. Dan:
There you go!
Recruit:
Go!
Sgt. Dan:
You got it.
(indistinct shouting)
Sgt. Dan:
Go, go, go, go, run!
Sgt. Williams:
If they have the heart for it,
we'll show them the road.
They just have
to run down it.
(recruit groans)
Recruit:
Damn, my legs are killing me.
Shawvan: I think it's when
everybody looks at me
like I lied to them.
William:
You do lie to us.
Shawvan: "You said this wasn't
going to happen."
Mm-hmm.
(laughter)
Everything's different
from last class,
but it's fun.
I mean, it's definitely
something new
and builds us,
brings us in together
more as a team.
William:
Just got to keep pushing.
We'll be alright.
I don't think no one's gonna
quit, bro.
Shawvan:
Good job today, you guys.
Lt. Kee:
Congratulations.
Day one is in the books.
You think we're all done
with the quitters?
Class:
Sir, yes, sir.
This is only the beginning.
Sgt. Williams:
Do not become complacent.
Our brothers and sisters
are in desperate need
of assistance
to serve the people.
Every day they have to wait
for more help
is a day
they are in more danger.
You are the help
that's coming.
♪♪
Sgt. Eldon Foster:
The last couple months
has been picking up.
We've been seeing a lot
of new crimes left and right.
The only thing that we can do
is prepare for that danger.
(Dispatch speaking over radio)
Sgt. Foster:
Ah, geez.
Hello?
Hey, um,
is this the same dude?
Remember the one
that got stabbed
by, um, the guy
across the street
when that firearm
was deployed on us?
It's the same one, right?
I'm gonna hang up now because
I'm gonna put my phone here.
This guy's probably gonna
fight with us.
(dogs barking)
They see us.
(banging on door)
Navajo Police. Keep knocking.
I'll get the (indistinct)
14-year-old JV
that's inside the back.
She's calling. She's crying.
When I went to the door
I just heard, "Oh, shit."
Can you ask
if she hears our knock?
We're knocking on the house.
You want to confirm
this is the right house?
-Dispatch: (indistinct)
-(banging on door)
Dispatch: She heard you.
She's whispering at this time.
She's scared
to get out of the shower.
Sgt. Foster:
Mm-hmm.
What do you think?
-Sgt. Foster: Yeah...
-(door creaks)
Officer:
What's going on?
(girl crying)
Girl:
I'm scared.
Sgt. Foster:
Okay.
Is there anybody else inside
that might be,
that might be hurt?
Sgt. Foster:
Okay. He's still inside?
Ta-ta-take her that way,
get her secured.
Go ahead and kick the door.
I'll follow you in.
Officer:
Okay.
(thudding)
Go, go, go, go, go.
Navajo police, man.
-Man: Dude.
-Sgt. Foster:
All the way down, man.
-Man: Okay.
-Sgt. Foster: All the way down.
-Put your hands behind--
-Man: What the hell?
Put your hands
behind your back.
Man:
Okay.
I don't know
what the hell's going on.
Officer:
Keep going that way.
Man:
I know, I know.
Sgt. Foster:
Are you okay?
Okay. Alright.
You're safe now, okay?
Boy:
Okay.
Sgt. Foster:
No, no, no, no, no.
Where's grandma and grandpa?
Get some shoes on, okay?
I'm gonna go check.
Anybody else in here?
-Boy: It's only me.
-Sgt. Foster: Huh?
Sgt. Foster: Nowhere. We're just
gonna find somebody that--
somebody, uh,
a parent for you, okay?
Not a good sight to see.
(Dispatch speaking)
Sgt. Foster:
Oof. Fucking A.
So these past few Sundays
have been
really, really, really busy.
So I'm expecting today's
gonna be the same,
and tonight is only us three.
Eugenia:
Crime is high.
It scares me.
It scares me because, uh,
we had our house broken into,
and we've heard of a couple,
you know,
their home was burglarized,
who were tied up,
um, and they were tied up
for three days,
and those are the scary stories
that keep us up at night.
But they're also
the scary stories
that make us want to leave.
There are a lot of people
who leave the reservation
that don't return,
and businesses don't want
to come onto the Nation
because it's not safe.
That means less
and less jobs here,
which means more people
are gonna leave
and that just, like, just...
(sighs heavily)
It-it, um...
makes you feel sick.
(Native American chanting)
Lt. Kee: It's difficult being
a law enforcement officer
on the Navajo Nation.
You see a lot of things
that are not in line
with some
traditional Navajo beliefs
as it pertains to harmony
and balance.
You see a lot
of unbalanced people
living unbalanced lives.
I don't know that there are
a whole lot
of truly traditional
Navajo people anymore.
So I can't say
that I'm truly traditional,
but my own experience
primarily is off-reservation.
I got finished growing up
in the Marine Corps. That was...
Marine Corps had a huge,
a huge impact on my life.
Gave me, gave me
a lot of good things,
gave me a lot of bad things,
but gave me
a lot of good things.
But, uh, because I was
Native American,
my, uh,
my team leader was like,
"You're gonna run point
because you're Navajo."
(laughs)
I guess he just assumed
that I had skills.
Platoon, at close interval,
dress right, dress!
Navajos have
a longstanding history
of military service.
A-ten-hut!
Big part of that is the lack
of immediate opportunity
for employment here on Navajo.
You know,
I went on my first deployment
and I, I saw combat
my first deployment,
uh, 19 years old.
-Your boots need some work.
-Shawvan: Sir, yes, sir.
Lt. Kee:
I do things to this day
that the Marine Corps
taught me.
Your jacket...
The way that I shine my boots,
the way that I shave
my face.
When did you start shaving?
Uh, last night, sir.
When was the first time
that you ever shaved your face?
Uh, sir, Sunday morning, sir.
Lt. Kee:
That was the very first time?
-Sir, no, sir.
-In your life.
When was the first time
you ever shaved your face?
Shawvan:
Sir, sophomore year, sir.
Okay. You need
to hit your upper lip.
What the military offered
for me was a plan.
Let me see
your fingernails.
I was not probably on
the best path as a teenager.
You got to cut your nails.
If the Marine Corps
hadn't been there for me,
I very easily could
have gone either way.
Go shave.
I very easily
could have been
one of the guys
that I frequently arrested.
Officer:
This last whole year,
we've done
32 recruit drives.
That's still one of our goals
is to start a huge class.
This class we had
over 250 applicants
that came in and of course
it narrowed down to 28.
So but we're still...
Ronald: One of the issues
that's plaguing us
with recruitment is that
everybody's passing
the physical fitness standards.
They're passing the tests,
the entrance exam,
but when we actually do
the background,
half of them are disqualified,
or mostly all of them
are disqualified.
Officer: We were working
on one background.
Young guy.
He's young, 24 years old.
and long and behold,
the individual had
a active warrant
out of Bernalillo County.
Ronald: A lot of our youngsters
have already established
a record for themselves.
To become a police officer,
your background literally
goes back to high school days.
So we have
to target the kids
at a very young age
to keep them out of trouble
as much as we can.
Sgt. Williams:
Watch what you do.
If you've done something
since you entered
the background process,
you need to let us know
immediately.
Use your heads.
We can't help you
if you're not honest
with us, can we?
Class:
Sir, no, sir.
Sgt. Williams: And what's
the best way to not have
to worry about any of this?
Recruit:
Don't do it, sir.
Don't--
Yeah, there you go.
Don't fuckin' do it.
These things always come
to the surface.
(phone ringing)
Dispatch:
Shiprock Police Department.
Uh, what kind
of weapon did you see?
And who is this individual?
-Sgt. Foster: 230.
-Paramedic: He's bleeding a lot.
He's all pale.
He about ready to go into shock
and the family members,
that lady that's with him,
hinders him from going.
And if we have to arrest him,
bring him in,
else he's gonna die
if he doesn't... (indistinct).
Sgt. Foster: Okay, well,
i-if he's gonna,
if he's gonna die and that's,
that's what you guys observe...
- Yeah.
-...we're gonna, we're gonna
get him out regardless.
Yeah.
-Man: Who's there?
-Sgt. Foster: Navajo Police.
Sgt. Foster:
You're talking to me.
Man:
Nobody's home.
Sgt. Foster:
Navajo police, open the door.
We want to check
on the individual
that's been stabbed in there.
Where's he at?
(man speaking indistinctly)
Okay, we got
to go check on him, okay?
-Man: Okay.
-Sgt. Foster: Excuse me.
Man:
Stand by. He's better.
Okay, we're going in there.
Excuse me.
(indistinct chatter)
Sgt. Foster:
Come on out, man.
-Come on out, man.
-(woman speaking indistinctly)
Sgt. Foster: I want to make sure
that you're okay, bro.
Oh, sheez,
you got stabbed, dude.
We got to take you
to the hospital, man.
(man speaking indistinctly)
Sgt. Foster:
Uh, they won't let her go
if she's intoxicated.
Man:
I'm okay.
Sgt. Foster:
You got to go, man.
It's-- You're--
You have no choice right now.
You're gonna have to go.
-(man speaking indistinctly)
-Lt. Kee: Get the EMT in.
I don't know if he saw
their bedroom,
but there was like
a huge amount of blood
inside that bedroom.
(phone ringing)
Dispatch:
Shiprock Police Department.
Okay, ma'am, I'll let
my officers know.
Uh, right now, they're out
on calls right now,
so it's gonna be a while.
(Dispatch speaking on radio)
Sgt. Foster:
Uh, LT, sir,
with your permission,
is it, is it okay
if I just pull Terrance
from the casino?
We are just getting hammered,
man, with a lot of calls.
Geez.
Shiprock, 235 Adam.
(phones ringing)
Officer (over radio):
235 Adam.
Narrator (on training video):
The transitions are slower.
You got to bring
a lot more patience,
a lot more focus
to that breath.
But welcome.
This is definitely gonna be
one potent experience today.
With that, I want you
to start in a position
that we call Dragon Pose.
So we're gonna come down
to our hands
and our knees,
if not already.
We're gonna step our
right foot in between our...
Sgt. Williams:
Hello.
Go ahead. What can I--
Oh, shit.
Okay, Sloan?
He's the suspect?
He's the suspect
in a criminal damage incident?
When did that happen?
Is he under subpoena?
Shit.
I want a copy
of the subpoena,
send a photo of it,
just anything that lets me know.
Let me go talk to him,
find out if he was arrested,
'cause he didn't declare
any arrests
on his background paperwork.
Sloan. Too Tall.
Where's Sloan?
Over here. You're on me.
So what is going on
with this court case?
It's my understanding
you're under subpoena.
-William: Yeah.
-Sgt. Williams: Yeah?
Who the fuck
are you talking to?
-William: Sir, yes, sir.
-Sgt. Williams: Okay, so tell me
about the subpoena.
Sgt. Williams:
Just like a couple weeks ago?
William:
Sir, yes, sir.
Why did you not disclose this
to background or academy staff?
William:
Sir, I'm not too sure, sir.
Yeah, you're done. Take him back
over to the kitchen.
Training officer:
I'll process him?
Sgt. Williams:
Let me call the commander.
Stand by on it.
Keep an eye on him.
Training officer:
Let's go.
Sgt. Williams:
Yeah. So let me, uh...
Yeah. Yep.
Um, I guess I need
a little guidance here.
This isn't a resignation.
This is a y-you're fucking done,
untruthfulness.
What, uh, what's--
What are we looking at?
(in Navajo)
Training officer:
You know the seriousness
of this, correct?
William:
Sir, yes, sir.
Training officer: You were told
to disclose everything.
Sgt. Williams: So I talked
to Lieutenant, he's gone.
I mean, this is a termination,
and he won't be eligible
for rehire, so...
Goddamn.
Page PD got sent over
to his house.
The wife called him
in intoxicated,
didn't want him to drive,
and he picked up a rock,
and he put it through
a window on a vehicle,
and it turned out to be
his mother-in-law's vehicle.
(Lt. Kee speaking over phone)
Sgt. Williams: Well, I had to do
the last one. That sucked.
Well, you did
the last one, so...
But...
You good to do it?
-Sgt. Dan: Mm-hmm.
-Sgt. Williams: Alright.
I don't have the heart.
We'll get it done and we'll
let you know when it's finished.
-Lt. Kee: Okay. Thank you.
-Alright, sir.
-Bye.
-Lt. Kee: Bye.
(in Navajo)
-Mm-hmm.
-Sgt. Williams: Okay.
(sighs)
(Director speaking)
Sgt. Dan:
I'm mad.
He has potential
to be, you know,
one of us.
Dispatch (over radio): All units
trying to get coordinates
to the 10-7.
Sgt. Foster: To another 10-7,
is that what you said?
(sighs) I-I just pulled Terrance
from the casino, man.
I had to. I already--
This is, this is not good.
So I already made the call.
Sergeant Foster,
Navajo Nation Police.
Can you tell me
what pills you took?
Is it this bottle
right here?
Sgt. Foster: What made you want
to take pills today?
Can you talk to me?
Stay awake, okay?
Stay awake.
Sgt. Dan: It's just hard
getting more people,
more officers
out there to help.
This memorandum serves
as official notification
that you are hereby terminated
from your position
as a police recruit
effective immediately.
If we don't get people
out there,
we're just gonna
be reducing in numbers.
Sgt. Foster:
Update, female on this end
is going in and out
of consciousness,
trying to find the bottle
that she consumed.
Dispatch: (indistinct)
have a elderly 101 10-7...
-Okay.
-Officer: Lithium.
-Lithium?
-Officer: Yeah.
Okay, okay.
(Dispatch continues)
Sgt. Foster:
I'm sorry. I apologize.
Can you repeat that please?
Daryl: We are short-staffed
to a point
that we cannot
effectively police.
Sgt. Foster:
Oh, my gosh.
There's no way
that we can do it safely.
Officer:
Don't reach anything.
Don't touch anything.
Come to the back.
Don't touch nothing!
I said come to the back.
Daryl: I go home at night
and I worry
every time my phone rings.
Sgt. Foster: Don't call out
to me like that, man.
Don't call out to me
like that, man.
You do not call out
to me like that, man.
Man:
Fuck you.
Sgt. Williams:
You have what's classified
as a felony arrest.
You really think
that it will be wise for us
to keep you here
with that on your record?
William:
Sir, no, sir.
Sgt. Williams: So,
a door's closing for you today.
So I don't know if you're
a spiritual man or not,
but you're not
on this path anymore
and there's a reason for it.
There might have been death
waiting on this path for you.
(suspect yelling)
Daryl:
We're not getting ahead.
And my fear is
we're not gonna be able.
Ma'am, ma'am, hold on.
Hold on.
Ma'am, you don't need
to scream.
What's your name
and phone number?
Eugenia:
This is our Nation.
It's been our land
from time immemorial.
We've always been within
the four sacred mountains.
And if the people keep leaving,
it's a scary thought,
but there would be really
no reason
to have this Nation.
And because everything
is tied to public safety
and justice,
the success of
the Navajo Police Academy
could break
or make the Nation.
(tense music playing)
♪♪